.. _h-summary-reference-label:

Architectural Summary
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Figure 1 shows a high-level view on the HiGHmed Platform architecture on the example of the Data Integration Centers of Goettingen and Heidelberg. As a basic principle, the HiGHmed approach aims for a careful balance between site-specific configuration of the MeDICs and necessary standardization. While the hospital information system environment will be the main sources for data, relevant information from different healthcare sectors is integrated and made available via the respective regional Personal cross-Enterprise Health Record (PEHR) based on IHE Cross-Enterprise Document Sharing (Imaging) (XDS-(I)) infrastructures. Local integration layers are built autonomously, due to heterogeneous individual hospital information system landscapes, to optimally address site-specific needs and to ensure provision of data to the HiGHmed Platform in time and with high data quality. Most commonly, this is achieved by establishing extract, transform, load (ETL) processes and by utilizing a communication server. Furthermore other cross-sectional and longitudinal data sets from registries, clinical trials and networked research projects will be also of high relevance as well as data out of patient care and research like environment data. For further local data analysis requirements adaptions of the HiGHmed Platform like adding a data lake to the ETL processes, are possible without jeopardizing the HiGHmed approach. Within its core, the HiGHmed Platform consists of an IHE XDS Affinity Domain that is combined with an openEHR clinical data repository. IHE XDS-I and Cross-Enterprise Document Reliable Interchange (XDR) profiles form a coarse-grained and scalable distribution service. Fine-grained APIs for data provision and access will be established by openEHR through the Archetype Query Language (AQL) (which will eventually be complemented by a SMART on FHIR interface). By using this combination, imaging data as well as (semi-)structured and unstructured data can be managed, distributed and provided within an organization based on shared information models. This way, the HiGHmed Platform provides means to develop a wide range of applications, ranging from small decision support apps, clinical registries and research databases to comprehensive electronic medical record (EMR) components. To support the HiGHmed use cases, new clinical application systems and data analysis apps will be directly developed against the HiGHmed Platform and deployed within the clinical care environment. 

To complement the information management capabilities of the platform, knowledge services are connected to the MeDICs to provide external information sources, such as literature and biomedical databases. These are essential to improve clinical care and research activities. Gathering medical information from different databases usually is a time-consuming manual task and needs extensive domain knowledge. A central knowledge connector component for the consortium will act as a one-stop-shop for information for users (via graphical user interface) and machines (via API), granting access to commercial and open databases by own API-based services. To provide data to partners in HiGHmed, data needs to be de-identified and made accessible through a data federation service. On request for a certain research project and based on a patient's consent, his or her data is automatically pseudonymized by a trusted third party (GECKO Institute at Heilbronn University) and afterwards either transferred to the requesting partner or made available in a XDS-based research data mart. Patients will have access to and control access of healthcare providers to their healthcare information. Exchange of record-level data is implemented based on IHE Cross-Community Document Reliable Interchange (XCDR) encapsulating AQL statements for requesting and exchanging data for research. IHE Cross-Community Access (XCA) is implemented to access data in XDS-based research data marts. While in general, de-centralization of components is a leading principle, some services need to be implemented inter-organizationally. These services cover information model governance, terminology servers, de-identification, privacy preserving record linkage, services to involve external parties and more. If possible, algorithms instead of data are to be exchanged, bringing algorithms to data not vice versa, to prevent massive data transfers as would be necessary for imaging and omics data. In the long term, we consider the need of data mappings to cause lasting expenses. Therefore, based on the introduction of a collaborative information and knowledge governance process, participants in HiGHmed will have the capability and tooling to iteratively harmonize their data semantics within clinical application systems and research databases. In so doing, newly developed and existing applications can increasingly produce data that can be directly loaded into the clinical data repositories of the MeDIC without laborious ETL-processes and extensive mappings that are costly and semantically lossy. This approach promises to greatly facilitate and streamline the provision of data within HiGHmed and to ensure sustainability.
 